Over the last decades, research on Recommender Systems has focused on models
and algorithms that provide personalized suggestions to customers with increasing
accuracy. This project proposes an investigation on the interplay between homophily
and recommendation processes in the prediction of movie ratings. Basically, the
question that is going to be addressed is:

“To which extent does a RS influence the actual choices of the target users?”

The assessment might find intriguing applications in real scenarios. For instance,
it can offer an indirect way to evaluate how much trust users place, on average,
in the recommendations provided by an online retailer service; without conducting
expensive surveys, that can be potentially biased and suffer from lack of participation.
The service suppliers can keep track of this level of trust in order to evaluate
the necessary investments for improving their offer.

Our approach is based on harnessing the temporal evolution of an affiliation
network, which links users to the respective rated movies. The projection into the
former group will reveal how their inter-connections evolve over time on the basis
of their rating patterns.

Similarly, synthetic networks are generated by a simple model that rewires the
links in the affiliation network, though preserving its degree distribution. One
parameter controls the fraction of movies that each user will see according to a collaborative
filtering algorithm, whereas the remaining titles are picked at random.
The tuning of this parameter will also reflect on the topology of the user network
and enables to redefine in mathematical terms the initial question, as it models the
trust placed, on average, in the RS.


The optimum model will be compared with the original projected network on
two trends that relate the impact of triadic and focal closure mechanisms on the
user link formation. Finally, the original trend will be fit by a baseline model that,
if statistically significant, will provide a much simpler explanation of the link formation
process.

The results suggest that the best model is achieved if users decide, on average,
to watch 40% of movies assigned by the RS, although there is no evidence that
it performs better than the baseline. This conclusion can be validated on bigger
datasets and with more advanced models, that take into account demographic and
personal information to provide recommendations.
